\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename emacs-twist.info
@settitle Emacs Twist User Documentation
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Twist: (emacs-twist). Source-based build machinery for Nix.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Emacs Twist User Documentation
@author omen2026
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Emacs Twist User Documentation
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* System requirements::
* Installation::
* Initial configuration of a project::
* How to run the configuration::
* Developing the configuration::
* Troubleshooting::
* Tips::
* Limitations::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Building with Nix::
* Lock individual packages::
* Support various package repositories::
* Pure builds vs. impure builds: Pure builds vs impure builds. 
* Build subset profiles with minimal extra time::
* nix eval-friendly APIs::
* Creating a self-contained environment with required executables::
* Almost no runtime::

Installation

* Turn on Nix flakes::
* Add an access token to GitHub::

Initial configuration of a project

* Initializing from a template::
* Manual creation of a project boilerplate::
* makeEnv options::
* Registry Configuration::
* Customization::

Manual creation of a project boilerplate

* Create flake.nix: Create flakenix. 
* Add flake inputs::
* Create a lock directory::
* Define flake outputs::

Registry Configuration

* Supported registries::
* MELPA (pure)::
* ELPA (pure)::
* Emacsmirror (pure)::
* Package archives (impure)::
* Registry entry fields::

Customization

* Org-babel configuration::
* Using a non-stable version of GNU Emacs::
* Using a configuration syntax other than use-package::

How to run the configuration

* Installation with home-manager::
* Normal installation (without home-manager)::
* Bubblewrap::

Developing the configuration

* Basic workflow::
* Working around sources::
* Custom build processes::
* Checking the versions of packages::

Troubleshooting

* Package not found after editing init.el: Package not found after editing initel. 
* Rate-limited by GitHub::
* Build failure on a specific package::

Tips

* --dry-run is your friend::
* Prefer building from sources::
* Inspecting the package set::

Limitations

* use-package-always-ensure option::
* Emacs Lisp packages that cannot be built with Twist::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@menu
* Building with Nix::
* Lock individual packages::
* Support various package repositories::
* Pure builds vs. impure builds: Pure builds vs impure builds. 
* Build subset profiles with minimal extra time::
* nix eval-friendly APIs::
* Creating a self-contained environment with required executables::
* Almost no runtime::
@end menu

@node Building with Nix
@section Building with Nix

Twist builds packages with the @uref{https://nixos.org/, Nix} package manager, a purely functional package manager for Linux and macOS@.
Rather than running a build process inside a running session of Emacs, it builds packages in a sandboxed Nix session.
This ensures that your entire configuration is reproducible.

Twist avoids systems programming in Emacs Lisp, which is hard to get right.
Nix handles most of the heavy lifting in package management, which makes the build process reliable and performant.

@node Lock individual packages
@section Lock individual packages

Twist lets you lock individual package versions.
This is different from @samp{emacsWithPackages} in Nixpkgs, which basically updates all packages to the latest version at once.
In Twist, you can select which packages to update, and the remaining packages won't be updated, even if their upstream repositories have newer revisions.
This is a recommended practice for security.

The format of a lock file is @samp{flake.nix} + @samp{flake.lock}, so you can use Nix to update packages.
You don't need a separate command for maintenance.

@node Support various package repositories
@section Support various package repositories

Twist can build most Emacs Lisp packages available from Git repositories.
It is capable of building quite a few packages on GNU/NonGNU ELPA and MELPA from sources.
Some packages from GNU ELPA cannot be built from sources, but Twist can also take advantage of pre-built package archives and Emacsmirror.

For Core ELPA packages, it can build them from a specific revision of the source repository of GNU Emacs.

With Twist, it is also easy to add packages from the wild.
Perhaps this is the biggest advantage of Twist over @samp{emacsWithPackages}.
Rather than writing a Nix expression (with a revision hash and checksum) for every package you want to add, you can simply create a MELPA recipe and run a lock command.
Those custom packages are tracked in @samp{flake.lock}, so it is also easy to update them.

@node Pure builds vs impure builds
@section Pure builds vs. impure builds

With Twist, there is a clear distinction between pure and impure builds of configuration.
If there is any package that is not tracked in the lock file, building the configuration will be impure.
Otherwise, all packages are locked, and the build is pure.
Impure build requires @samp{--impure} flag of Nix.
It still allows impure builds, for ease of development, but you will know whether your configuration will be reproducible on other machines.

@node Build subset profiles with minimal extra time
@section Build subset profiles with minimal extra time

Typical package managers for Emacs store packages in @samp{user-emacs-directory}.
If the user has multiple configuration profiles using a tool like @uref{https://github.com/plexus/chemacs2, chemacs2}, the installation time will be approximately proportional to the number of profiles.

On the contrary, Twist is based on Nix, so it stores all sources and artifacts in the centralized Nix store.
If the user has multiple configuration profiles with the same revision set of packages, it requires almost no extra time for installing multiple profiles.
The total time will be almost the same as the build time for their master profile.
This saves your time, if you have such use cases.

@uref{https://github.com/emacs-twist/org-babel, org-babel} library for Nix allows you to define subprofiles from a single Org file according to tags.

@node nix eval-friendly APIs
@section nix eval-friendly APIs

Twist exposes an API that is accessible via @samp{nix eval} command.
You can inspect metadata of a specific package or all packages without running the configuration.
This shouldn't be necessary, but it helps troubleshooting once the build process fails.
It is also possible to export an entire package set to JSON, which can be used to script around your configuration.

@node Creating a self-contained environment with required executables
@section Creating a self-contained environment with required executables

Twist provides an option for feeding packages from Nixpkgs to @samp{exec-path} of Emacs.
This is equivalent to @samp{use-package-ensure-system-package}, but it doesn't rely on imperative usage of a package manager.

@node Almost no runtime
@section Almost no runtime

Twist builds packages outside of a live Emacs session, and it requires no runtime, except for loading pre-generated autoloads.
The startup time of Twist-based Emacs is as fast as that of @samp{package.el}, or maybe even slightly faster.

@node System requirements
@chapter System requirements

Twist depends on the Nix package manager.
Nix is currently supported on Linux and macOS@.
For details, refer to the manual of Nix: @uref{https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/installation/supported-platforms.html}

Also, the Nix package manager on your system must be version 2.4 or later.
To check the version of Nix, run the following command on terminal:

@example
nix --version
@end example

The command should print an output as follows:

@example
nix (Nix) 2.8.0pre20220411_f7276bc
@end example

If you don't have Nix, you can download it from here: @uref{https://nixos.org/download.html}

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

Before you use Twist on your machine, you may need an additional configuration.

@menu
* Turn on Nix flakes::
* Add an access token to GitHub::
@end menu

@node Turn on Nix flakes
@section Turn on Nix flakes

Twist is designed for use in a Nix flake.
Flakes are an experimental feature of Nix, and may be turned off by default depending on your Nix version.

To turn on the feature, follow the instruction in the following article: @uref{https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes#Installing_flakes}

@node Add an access token to GitHub
@section Add an access token to GitHub

Twist is a source-based build machinery.
It fetches package sources from upstream repositories with Nix.
As most Emacs Lisp packages are hosted on @uref{https://github.com/, GitHub} nowadays, and GitHub imposes a rather strict rate limit (60 per hour) on API access, you are likely to be blocked from @samp{api.github.com} when you use Twist.

To mitigate this issue, you can expand the rate limit by using authorized access to GitHub.
This will increase the rate limit to 5000 per hour, which is sufficient for normal use.

To enable authorized access to GitHub, you have to generate an access token on GitHub and add it to your @samp{nix.conf}.
You need a GitHub account.

@enumerate
@item
Log in to your GitHub account, go to @uref{https://github.com/settings/apps, Developer Settings}, and visit @emph{Personal access tokens}.
@item
Press @emph{Generate new token} button.
@item
Set a note and expiration. Select @samp{repo:status} and @samp{public_repo}, and press @emph{Generate token} button.
@item
Copy the token and add it to your @samp{nix.conf}.
@end enumerate

When you finish these steps, your @samp{nix.conf} should contain a line as follows:

@example
access-tokens = github.com=XXXXXX
@end example

For details on rate limiting on GitHub, refer to the following section in the GitHub Docs:
@uref{https://docs.github.com/en/rest/overview/resources-in-the-rest-api#rate-limiting}

For details on scopes, refer to the following article in the GitHub Docs: @uref{https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/scopes-for-oauth-apps}

@node Initial configuration of a project
@chapter Initial configuration of a project

@menu
* Initializing from a template::
* Manual creation of a project boilerplate::
* makeEnv options::
* Registry Configuration::
* Customization::
@end menu

@node Initializing from a template
@section Initializing from a template

To create a new configuration from scratch, you can use a template.
First, create an empty directory.
Then, run the following command in the directory:

@example
nix flake init -t github:emacs-twist/twist.nix
@end example

The template creates the following files:

@itemize
@item
@samp{flake.nix} — the Nix flake with all inputs (nixpkgs, twist, MELPA, GNU ELPA, NonGNU ELPA, Emacsmirror) and the call to @samp{twist.lib.makeEnv}.
@item
@samp{init.el} — a starter init file using @samp{use-package}.  Add @samp{use-package} blocks with @samp{:ensure t} here.
@item
@samp{early-init.el} — sets @samp{package-enable-at-startup} to @samp{nil} so that @samp{package.el} does not run at startup.
@item
@samp{lock/} — an empty lock directory (contains @samp{.gitkeep}) where Twist will write @samp{flake.nix}, @samp{flake.lock}, and @samp{archive.lock}.
@item
@samp{README.md} — quick-start instructions.
@end itemize

Now you can work on your configuration by adding @samp{use-package} blocks to @samp{init.el}.

Twist also provides some extra flexibility on configuration:

@itemize
@item
Manage your configuration in an Org file
@item
Use an alternative utility other than @samp{use-package}, like @samp{setup.el}
@end itemize

Otherwise, you can skip the following subsections to start developing your configuration.

@node Manual creation of a project boilerplate
@section Manual creation of a project boilerplate

Alternatively, if you already have an Emacs configuration built with Nix, you can migrate your configuration to Twist by tweaking your configuration.

This subsection assumes you have a flake for your Emacs configuration.

@menu
* Create flake.nix: Create flakenix. 
* Add flake inputs::
* Create a lock directory::
* Define flake outputs::
@end menu

@node Create flakenix
@subsection Create flake.nix

You must track your configuration in a Git repository, and the root directory of the repository must contain @samp{flake.nix}.
It must follow the format of @uref{https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes, Nix flakes} as recognized by Nix.
You can run the following command to create a @samp{flake.nix}:

@example
nix flake init
@end example

@node Add flake inputs
@subsection Add flake inputs

To use Twist, you have to add @samp{github:emacs-twist/twist.nix} to the inputs:

@example
inputs.twist.url = "github:emacs-twist/twist.nix";
@end example

You will also need to add flake inputs for the registries you use.
See @ref{Registry Configuration} for details.

@node Create a lock directory
@subsection Create a lock directory

You have to create a directory for lock files.
The directory can be anywhere inside the repository, but not the root directory of the repository.

For example, if the directory is named @samp{lock}, you can use the following commands:

@example
mkdir -p lock
touch lock/.gitkeep
git add lock/.gitkeep
@end example

Note that the directory must not be empty.
It must be considered non-empty by Nix, so you have to create an empty file (e.g. @samp{.gitkeep}) in the directory and add it to the Git index.

@node Define flake outputs
@subsection Define flake outputs

A typical @samp{flake.nix} looks like the following.
It uses @samp{nixpkgs.lib.genAttrs} together with the @samp{nix-systems/default} helper to support multiple systems:

@example
@{
  inputs = @{
    nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixos-unstable";
    systems.url = "github:nix-systems/default";
    twist.url = "github:emacs-twist/twist.nix";
    # ... registry inputs (melpa, gnu-elpa, etc.) ...
  @};

  outputs = @{ nixpkgs, systems, twist, ... @} @@ inputs:
    let
      eachSystem = f:
        nixpkgs.lib.genAttrs (import systems)
          (system: f (import nixpkgs @{ inherit system; @}));

      inherit (twist.lib) makeEnv;

      emacsConfig = pkgs: makeEnv @{
        inherit pkgs;
        # ... configuration options ...
      @};
    in @{
      packages = eachSystem (pkgs: rec @{
        emacs = emacsConfig pkgs;
        default = emacs;
      @});

      apps = eachSystem (pkgs:
        (emacsConfig pkgs).makeApps @{ lockDirName = "lock"; @}
      );
    @};
@}
@end example

It is also possible to use other libraries such as @uref{https://github.com/numtide/flake-utils, flake-utils} for the boilerplate.
If you want to track the Emacs configuration in the same repository as a NixOS/home-manager configuration, @uref{https://github.com/gytis-ivaskevicius/flake-utils-plus, flake-utils-plus} is recommended, but it is not described in this manual.

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Define a package}Define a package


The configuration is built using @samp{twist.lib.makeEnv}:

@example
inherit (twist.lib) makeEnv;

emacsConfig = pkgs: makeEnv @{
  inherit pkgs;
  emacsPackage = pkgs.emacs;

  # The path to the lock directory
  lockDir = ./lock;

  # Your Emacs initialization file(s)
  initFiles = [ ./init.el ];

  # Registries (package-source metadata)
  registries = [ ... ];
@};
@end example

The result is a scope (an attribute set that is also a derivation), so you can add it to the flake outputs:

@example
packages = eachSystem (pkgs: rec @{
  emacs = emacsConfig pkgs;
  default = emacs;
@});
@end example

@item
@anchor{Derive apps for administration}Derive apps for administration


You will also need apps to lock and update packages.
You can add these outputs as follows:

@example
apps = eachSystem (pkgs:
  (emacsConfig pkgs).makeApps @{ lockDirName = "lock"; @}
);
@end example

You have to set @samp{lockDirName} to the path to the lock directory as a string.
@samp{makeApps} exposes two apps:

@itemize
@item
@samp{nix run .#lock} — regenerates @samp{lock/flake.nix} and @samp{lock/archive.lock}, then runs @samp{nix flake lock} to update @samp{lock/flake.lock}.
@item
@samp{nix run .#update} — refreshes the archive lock (@samp{lock/archive.lock}) with latest packages from ELPA package archives.
@end itemize
@end enumerate

@node makeEnv options
@section makeEnv options

The @samp{twist.lib.makeEnv} function accepts the following arguments:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Argument
@tab Type
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{pkgs}
@tab attrset
@tab (required)
@tab Nixpkgs instance
@item @samp{emacsPackage}
@tab package
@tab @samp{pkgs.emacs}
@tab The Emacs derivation to wrap
@item @samp{lockDir}
@tab path
@tab (required)
@tab Path to the lock directory (must be a Git-tracked directory)
@item @samp{initFiles}
@tab list
@tab (required)
@tab List of paths to init files parsed to discover packages
@item @samp{registries}
@tab list
@tab (required)
@tab List of registry entries; see @ref{Registry Configuration}
@item @samp{initParser}
@tab function
@tab @samp{lib.parseUsePackages @{@}}
@tab Parser factory; set to @samp{lib.parseSetup @{@}} for @samp{setup.el} configs
@item @samp{initReader}
@tab function
@tab reads file then runs initParser
@tab Override to customise how init files are read
@item @samp{extraPackages}
@tab list
@tab @samp{["use-package"]} on Emacs <29
@tab Additional package names to install unconditionally
@item @samp{localPackages}
@tab list
@tab @samp{[]}
@tab Package names co-located in this repo; excluded from the generated flake
@item @samp{persistMetadata}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Persist package metadata JSON in the lock dir (avoids IFD)
@item @samp{defaultMainIsAscii}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Assume all package main files are ASCII (required for some IFD avoidance)
@item @samp{exportManifest}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Export a manifest file from the wrapper (needed for twist.el hot-reload)
@item @samp{nativeCompileAheadDefault}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{true}
@tab Ahead-of-time native compilation for all packages
@item @samp{addSystemPackages}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{true}
@tab Feed @samp{:system-packages} declarations from init files into @samp{exec-path}
@item @samp{inputOverrides}
@tab attrset
@tab @samp{@{@}}
@tab Per-package source overrides
@item @samp{configurationRevision}
@tab string
@tab @samp{null}
@tab Revision string embedded in the wrapper
@item @samp{extraSiteStartElisp}
@tab string
@tab @samp{""}
@tab Extra Emacs Lisp inserted into the site-start file
@item @samp{initialLibraries}
@tab list
@tab @samp{null}
@tab User-supplied list of Emacs built-in library names (overrides auto-detect)
@end multitable

@node Registry Configuration
@section Registry Configuration

@emph{Registries} are repositories from which Twist can discover information on Emacs Lisp packages.

In GNU Emacs, the user can install packages from package archives such as GNU ELPA, NonGNU ELPA, and MELPA@.
Those archives serve pre-built files and tarballs which can be installed using @samp{package.el}.

While Twist supports package archives, it is primarily intended for building packages from sources.
Twist somehow needs to discover the source repositories of packages the user wants to install, and those meta-repositories are called registries.

Registries are passed to @samp{twist.lib.makeEnv} as the @samp{registries} argument — a list of attribute sets, each describing one registry:

@example
registries = [
  @{
    type = "elpa";
    path = inputs.gnu-elpa.outPath + "/elpa-packages";
    core-src = pkgs.emacs.src;
    auto-sync-only = true;
  @}
  @{
    name = "melpa";
    type = "melpa";
    path = inputs.melpa.outPath + "/recipes";
  @}
  @{
    type = "elpa";
    path = inputs.nongnu.outPath + "/elpa-packages";
  @}
  @{
    name = "gnu";
    type = "archive-contents";
    path = inputs.gnu-elpa-archive.outPath;
    base-url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/d12frosted/elpa-mirror/master/gnu/";
  @}
  @{
    name = "emacsmirror";
    type = "gitmodules";
    path = inputs.epkgs.outPath + "/.gitmodules";
  @}
];
@end example

Note: the old argument name @samp{inventories} is still accepted as a deprecated alias and will print a warning at evaluation time. Use @samp{registries} in all new configurations.

@menu
* Supported registries::
* MELPA (pure)::
* ELPA (pure)::
* Emacsmirror (pure)::
* Package archives (impure)::
* Registry entry fields::
@end menu

@node Supported registries
@subsection Supported registries

The following values of @samp{type} are supported:

@itemize
@item
@samp{melpa} — the @samp{recipes/} directory of @uref{https://github.com/melpa/melpa, MELPA} or a fork; contains MELPA-style recipe files.
@item
@samp{elpa} — the @samp{elpa-packages} file of @uref{https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/emacs/elpa.git/, GNU ELPA} or @uref{https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/emacs/nongnu.git/, NonGNU ELPA}.
@item
@samp{archive-contents} — a pre-built package archive as supported by @samp{package.el} (e.g. an @samp{archive-contents} file).  This is an @emph{impure} registry; see below.
@item
@samp{gitmodules} — the @samp{.gitmodules} list of @uref{https://github.com/emacsmirror/epkgs, emacsmirror/epkgs}.
@end itemize

@emph{Impure} registries (@samp{archive-contents}) require Nix to make a network connection.
The user must pass @samp{--impure} when running the lock operation.
All other registry types are @emph{pure}: they are tracked as Nix flake inputs and locked to particular revisions.

Once all packages in a configuration are locked, the user can build the configuration without @samp{--impure}, which means the entire configuration is pure.
Every time the user adds a new package, the lock operation must be re-run.

@node MELPA (pure)
@subsection MELPA (pure)

Use a flake input pointing to the MELPA repository (or a fork) with @samp{flake = false}, then reference its @samp{recipes/} directory:

@example
# In flake inputs:
melpa = @{
  url = "github:melpa/melpa";
  flake = false;
@};

# In registries:
@{
  name = "melpa";
  type = "melpa";
  path = inputs.melpa.outPath + "/recipes";
@}
@end example

@node ELPA (pure)
@subsection ELPA (pure)

Use a flake input pointing to the GNU ELPA or NonGNU ELPA repository, then reference the @samp{elpa-packages} file.
For GNU ELPA, you should also supply @samp{core-src} (the Emacs source tree) so that Core ELPA packages can be built from source, and set @samp{auto-sync-only = true} to skip packages that cannot be built from source:

@example
# Recommended configuration for GNU ELPA:
@{
  type = "elpa";
  path = inputs.gnu-elpa.outPath + "/elpa-packages";
  core-src = pkgs.emacs.src;
  auto-sync-only = true;
@}

# NonGNU ELPA (no core-src needed):
@{
  type = "elpa";
  path = inputs.nongnu.outPath + "/elpa-packages";
@}
@end example

@node Emacsmirror (pure)
@subsection Emacsmirror (pure)

Emacsmirror tracks almost every Emacs Lisp package ever published.
Use its @samp{.gitmodules} file:

@example
# In flake inputs:
epkgs = @{
  url = "github:emacsmirror/epkgs";
  flake = false;
@};

# In registries:
@{
  name = "emacsmirror";
  type = "gitmodules";
  path = inputs.epkgs.outPath + "/.gitmodules";
@}
@end example

@node Package archives (impure)
@subsection Package archives (impure)

An @samp{archive-contents} registry points to a pre-built archive.
Because Nix must download the archive-contents file at evaluation time, this requires @samp{--impure}:

@example
@{
  name = "gnu";
  type = "archive-contents";
  path = inputs.gnu-elpa-archive.outPath;
  base-url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/d12frosted/elpa-mirror/master/gnu/";
@}
@end example

Using a mirror (as in the example above) avoids relying on the live GNU ELPA server.

@node Registry entry fields
@subsection Registry entry fields

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Field
@tab Applies to
@tab Description
@item @samp{type}
@tab all
@tab Registry type (required): @samp{melpa}, @samp{elpa}, @samp{archive-contents}, @samp{gitmodules}
@item @samp{name}
@tab all
@tab Optional name for pinning or disambiguation
@item @samp{path}
@tab all except remote archives
@tab Path to the registry data (flake input @samp{.outPath})
@item @samp{core-src}
@tab @samp{elpa}
@tab Path to Emacs source tree for building Core ELPA packages
@item @samp{auto-sync-only}
@tab @samp{elpa}
@tab If @samp{true}, skip packages that cannot be built from source
@item @samp{base-url}
@tab @samp{archive-contents}
@tab Base URL from which to download package tarballs
@end multitable

@node Customization
@section Customization

@menu
* Org-babel configuration::
* Using a non-stable version of GNU Emacs::
* Using a configuration syntax other than use-package::
@end menu

@node Org-babel configuration
@subsection Org-babel configuration

The @uref{https://github.com/emacs-twist/org-babel, org-babel} library for Nix allows you to define Twist configurations (and sub-profiles) from a single Org file using Babel source blocks.
Refer to that library's documentation for details.

@node Using a non-stable version of GNU Emacs
@subsection Using a non-stable version of GNU Emacs

You can pass any Emacs derivation as @samp{emacsPackage}.
For example, to use the latest unstable Emacs from @uref{https://github.com/nix-community/emacs-overlay, emacs-overlay}:

@example
inputs.emacs-overlay.url = "github:nix-community/emacs-overlay";

# In makeEnv:
emacsPackage = inputs.emacs-overlay.packages.$@{system@}.emacs-unstable;
@end example

@node Using a configuration syntax other than use-package
@subsection Using a configuration syntax other than use-package

By default Twist parses @samp{use-package} declarations to discover which packages to install.
To use @uref{https://github.com/jwiegley/setup.el, setup.el} instead, pass @samp{lib.parseSetup @{@}} as @samp{initParser}:

@example
makeEnv @{
  # ...
  initParser = twist.lib.parseSetup @{@};
@}
@end example

Both @samp{lib.parseUsePackages} and @samp{lib.parseSetup} are exported from @samp{twist.lib}.

@node How to run the configuration
@chapter How to run the configuration

@menu
* Installation with home-manager::
* Normal installation (without home-manager)::
* Bubblewrap::
@end menu

@node Installation with home-manager
@section Installation with home-manager

The recommended way to install Twist on a user account is through the Home Manager module.
Add the module to your Home Manager configuration:

@example
inputs.twist.url = "github:emacs-twist/twist.nix";

# In home-manager modules list:
twist.homeModules.emacs-twist
@end example

The module exposes options under @samp{programs.emacs-twist}:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Option
@tab Type
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{enable}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Enable the Emacs Twist module
@item @samp{name}
@tab string
@tab @samp{"emacs"}
@tab Name of the wrapper script in @samp{$PATH}
@item @samp{directory}
@tab string
@tab @samp{".config/emacs"}
@tab Path to @samp{user-emacs-directory} relative to @samp{$HOME}
@item @samp{config}
@tab attrset
@tab (required)
@tab The result of @samp{twist.lib.makeEnv @{ ... @}}
@item @samp{createInitFile}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Write a combined @samp{init.el} into the directory
@item @samp{earlyInitFile}
@tab path
@tab @samp{null}
@tab Path to an @samp{early-init.el} to install
@item @samp{createManifestFile}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Write the manifest JSON into the directory
@item @samp{manifestFileName}
@tab string
@tab @samp{"twist-manifest.json"}
@tab Filename of the manifest, relative to @samp{user-emacs-directory}
@item @samp{emacsclient.enable}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Install @samp{emacsclient} alongside the wrapper
@item @samp{serviceIntegration.enable}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{false}
@tab Enable a systemd service for the Emacs daemon
@item @samp{icons.enable}
@tab bool
@tab @samp{true}
@tab Install Emacs application icons
@item @samp{desktopItem.desktopName}
@tab string
@tab @samp{"Emacs"}
@tab Long name for the desktop entry
@item @samp{desktopItem.mimeTypes}
@tab list
@tab @samp{["text/plain" "inode/directory"]}
@tab MIME types associated with the entry
@end multitable

A minimal Home Manager configuration looks like:

@example
programs.emacs-twist = @{
  enable = true;
  config = twist.lib.makeEnv @{
    inherit pkgs;
    emacsPackage = pkgs.emacs;
    lockDir = ./lock;
    initFiles = [ ./init.el ];
    registries = [ ... ];
  @};
  createInitFile = true;
  earlyInitFile = ./early-init.el;
  emacsclient.enable = true;
  serviceIntegration.enable = true;
@};
@end example

@node Normal installation (without home-manager)
@section Normal installation (without home-manager)

If you are not using Home Manager, you can add the Twist configuration derivation directly to your environment.
The result of @samp{makeEnv} is itself a derivation (a wrapper around the Emacs binary), so you can install it via @samp{nix profile install} or reference it in a @samp{nix shell}:

@example
nix build .#emacs
result/bin/emacs
@end example

@node Bubblewrap
@section Bubblewrap

On NixOS, Emacs can be sandboxed with Bubblewrap.
Refer to the NixOS documentation for details on wrapping programs.

@node Developing the configuration
@chapter Developing the configuration

@menu
* Basic workflow::
* Working around sources::
* Custom build processes::
* Checking the versions of packages::
@end menu

@node Basic workflow
@section Basic workflow

The basic development loop is:

@enumerate
@item
Add or modify @samp{use-package} (or @samp{setup.el}) forms in your @samp{init.el}.
@item
Run @samp{nix run .#lock} to regenerate the lock files for any new packages.
@item
Run @samp{nix build .#emacs} (or @samp{nix build .#default}) to build the configuration.
@item
Run @samp{nix run .#update} periodically to pull in new versions from ELPA archives.
@end enumerate

@node Working around sources
@section Working around sources

If a package's upstream source is temporarily unavailable or you need to override it, use @samp{inputOverrides}.
For example, to use a GitHub mirror of a package whose canonical host is unreliable:

@example
inputOverrides = @{
  tramp = _: _: @{
    origin = @{
      type = "github";
      owner = "emacs-straight";
      repo = "tramp";
      ref = "master";
    @};
  @};
@};
@end example

To remove build-time files that would otherwise cause build failures:

@example
inputOverrides = @{
  bbdb = _: super: @{
    files = builtins.removeAttrs super.files [
      "bbdb-notmuch.el"
      "bbdb-vm.el"
      "bbdb-vm-aux.el"
    ];
  @};
@};
@end example

@node Custom build processes
@section Custom build processes

Individual package builds can be customised through @samp{inputOverrides} by overriding attributes in the package's attribute set.
Refer to the package build derivation in @samp{pkgs/emacs/build/} for available attributes.

@node Checking the versions of packages
@section Checking the versions of packages

@samp{depsCheck} attribute is a derivation that checks version boundaries between Emacs Lisp packages.
If any of the dependencies are lower than the versions specified in the @samp{Package-Requires} header of their dependants, it will exit with non-zero:

@example
nix build .#emacs.depsCheck --print-build-logs
@end example

You can add it to the @samp{checks} output of your flake:

@example
@{
  outputs = inputs:
    let
      emacs = twist.lib.makeEnv @{ ... @};
    in @{
      checks.x86_64-linux.elisp-versions = emacs.depsCheck;
    @};
@}
@end example

@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting

This section describes how to deal with common errors in building configurations.

@menu
* Package not found after editing init.el: Package not found after editing initel. 
* Rate-limited by GitHub::
* Build failure on a specific package::
@end menu

@node Package not found after editing initel
@section Package not found after editing init.el

If Twist cannot find a package you just added, run the lock command to update the lock files:

@example
nix run .#lock
@end example

Every new package must be locked before it can be built in pure mode.

@node Rate-limited by GitHub
@section Rate-limited by GitHub

See @ref{Add an access token to GitHub} above for instructions on adding a GitHub access token to @samp{nix.conf}.

@node Build failure on a specific package
@section Build failure on a specific package

Use @samp{nix eval} to inspect the package metadata:

@example
nix eval .#emacs.packageInputs.<package-name>
@end example

You can also check reverse dependencies:

@example
nix eval .#emacs.revDeps.<package-name>
@end example

@node Tips
@chapter Tips

@menu
* --dry-run is your friend::
* Prefer building from sources::
* Inspecting the package set::
@end menu

@node --dry-run is your friend
@section --dry-run is your friend

To quickly examine sanity of your configuration, a recommended way is to build the configuration with @samp{--dry-run} flag:

@example
nix build .#emacs --dry-run
@end example

If the command fails with non-zero exit code, it is likely that there is something wrong with your configuration, not an individual Emacs Lisp package.

@node Prefer building from sources
@section Prefer building from sources

It is recommended to build a package from an upstream whenever possible.

This is because an archive tarball can be deleted from its server when the package creates a new release:

@example
error: unable to download 'https://elpa.gnu.org/packages/vertico-0.18.tar': HTTP error 404 ('Not Found')

       response body:

       <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML 2.0//EN">
       <html><head>
       <title>404 Not Found</title>
       </head><body>
       <h1>Not Found</h1>
       <p>The requested URL was not found on this server.</p>
       <hr>
       <address>Apache/2.4.51 (Debian) Server at elpa.gnu.org Port 443</address>
       </body></html>
@end example

Use an @samp{elpa} registry entry with @samp{auto-sync-only = true} and fall back to an @samp{archive-contents} mirror for packages that cannot be built from source.

@node Inspecting the package set
@section Inspecting the package set

You can explore the full package metadata without building:

@example
nix eval .#emacs.packageInputs --json | jq .
@end example

@node Limitations
@chapter Limitations

@menu
* use-package-always-ensure option::
* Emacs Lisp packages that cannot be built with Twist::
@end menu

@node use-package-always-ensure option
@section use-package-always-ensure option

@uref{https://github.com/jwiegley/use-package, use-package} provides @samp{use-package-always-ensure} option, which makes @samp{package.el} install packages that have no @samp{:ensure} option set:

@lisp
(require 'use-package-ensure)
(setq use-package-always-ensure t)
@end lisp

Unfortunately, Twist cannot handle this option well at the time of writing.

A better way is to @strong{not} use @samp{use-package-always-ensure} option.
Add @samp{:ensure t} option explicitly to each declaration of a package you want to install.
This way, you can simply pass the init file to Twist and also have a choice of explicitly installing some GNU ELPA Core libraries from the upstream.

@node Emacs Lisp packages that cannot be built with Twist
@section Emacs Lisp packages that cannot be built with Twist

It is known that Twist cannot build the following packages:

@itemize
@item
@samp{pdf-tools}
@end itemize

Twist simply cannot build these packages for some technical reasons.
It would be better for Twist to support all packages on GNU/NonGNU ELPA and MELPA, but it is not the case.

For the latest information, see @uref{https://github.com/emacs-twist/twist.nix/issues, Issues} of Twist.
If you have found any other packages that cannot be built using Twist, please file an issue.

@bye
